Eudox: Eudora mail encryption plug-in
-------------------------------------

Eudox is an Eudora e-mail program addition that
will, on an explicit request from the user, encrypt
and decrypt text using a 128-bit ("strong")
cryptographic algorithm named Blowfish.

Encrypted message text is very safe in transit, but
remember that both Eudora and - especially - Windows
can leave data on the hard drive even if has been
"deleted". This program therefore provides only a
limited protection from an attacker who can gain
either physical or network access to the computer
used to send and receive e-mail.

Download the eudox.dll and copy it into the directory
where Eudora will look for plugins. This directory is
named "plugins", and is a sub_directory of the
directory where eudora.exe is located. (Alternatively,
it can be a sub-directory of the user's mail directory,
see Eudora help for details).

If located properly, Eudox will be "connected to"
whenever Eudora is started. This connection can be
verified by clicking on [Special] on the main Eudora
menu, followed by [Message Plug-ins Settings...].
While Eudox requires no "settings", it will announce
its presence and version number.

Using Eudox:
------------

The key must be entered before any encryption or
decryption can be done. To do so, click on [Tools]
on the main Eudora menu. Underneath, there will be
an entry named [Eudox - Enter or Change Key]. When
clicked, this will activate a key entry dialog.

You can enter either a key (8 to 16 characters), or
a long, non-sensical sentence (a "pass-phrase") which
the program will internally convert and store as a
16-byte key. Both the key and the pass-phrase are case
sensitive. It is sufficient to enter it once if all you
want to do is to decrypt an incoming message, but it
must be entered two times ("confirmed", keyed-in on both
dialog lines) in order to perform encryption. The key
can be changed whenever required.

Under [Edit] on the main menu there is an entry named
[Message Plug-ins]. When activated, there will be
(possibly among other plugin entries) two menu entries
named [Eudox - Encrypt] and [Eudox - Decrypt]. When
activated, the program will perform encryption or
decryption, respectively, of the message in the active
Eudora message sub-window, using the last entered key.
If there is a selected ("highlighted") section of the
message, only that section will be encrypted or
decrypted. This is a preferred mode of operation:
just select the paragraph(s) you want to encrypt or
the section of an incoming message composed of
64-character "garbage" lines and click on the
appropriate crypto function.

HTML "tags": Eudox assumes the messages to be encrypted
and decrypted consist of "plain" ascii text. In versions
4.0 and higher, Eudora appears to present all text to
Eudox as "html", even if the text will be mailed later
on as plain text. In these versions, and if the text is
presented as "html type" to Eudox, following "tags"
will be removed from the plaintext message:
<html>, <br>, </html> (only at the end of a line) and
&nbsp (anywhere in the text). This means that if your
message contains such strings (in the specified positions)
they will be removed.

Current version of Eudox is 3.16; it has been tested
with Eudora 3.0.6, 4.3 and 5.1.

There is a companion program called Notex (notex.exe).
It is very similar to Windows Notepad applet. It can be
used to encrypt and decrypt data in the same format as
that used by Eudox. This data can be transferred (using
the clipboard) from and to mail composition or display
window of almost any other e-mail program - indeed any
Windows program which supports text data transfer via
the clipboard.

And this is it...
