Notex: a "crypto-enabled" Windows text editor
---------------------------------------------

Notex is a simple text-editor program. It is very similar
to the Notepad Windows applet - with one notable addition:
it will encrypt and decrypt text using a 128-bit ("strong")
cryptographic algorithm named Blowfish. This facility can
be used, among others, to send and receive secure e-mail.
Secure - in this context - means that the message can be
neither generated nor read by someone who is not in the
possession of a secret key, shared between the sender and
the receiver of the message. Notex uses the Windows
"clipboard" to transfer both plaintext and ciphertext to
and from an existing e-mail client text-composition or
display window. Encrypted data is very safe in transit,
but remember that any applications running under Windows
(and, especially, Windows itself) can leave data on the
hard drive even if it has been "deleted". This program
therefore provides only a limited protection from an
attacker who can gain either physical or network access
to the computer used to send and receive e-mail.

It is assumed that the reader is already the user of an
existing e-mail program (Eudora, Outlook, etc.) and is
familiar with its text composition and display, as well as
clipboard import and export functions. (Check the "Help"
that comes with the mail program for details). It is also
assumed that the reader knows how to use the Notepad
"applet" present in all Windows systems. There is
extensive on-line help in Notepad, most of which applies
also to the Notex program.

Using Notex:
------------

A key must be entered before the program can perform either
encryption or decryption. This is done using the [Crypto] -
[Enter or Change Key...] functions on the Notex main menu.
Doing this once is sufficient to decrypt the text, but the
key must be entered a second time ("confirmed") in order to
encrypt text. (Using an erroneous key while decrypting the
text will be detected and/or reported immediately, while a
text encrypted with a key different from the one known to
the intended recipient will be detected only when it is
probably to late to correct the error - in the hands of
the recipient who is unable to decrypt the message).

The key can be a short "word" of a minimum of 8 and maximum
of 16 characters, preferably including upper and lower case
letters, numbers and punctuation, or a long, non-sensical
sentence (a "pass-phrase") which the program will internally
convert to and use as a 16-byte key. Both the key and the
pass-phrase are case sensitive.

In a typical application, the sender will compose the text
of the message directly in the Notex window, and use the
[Encrypt Text to Clipboard] function on the main menu of
Notex, followed by [Paste] in an e-mail program message
composition window. Encrypted text can be the whole, or
only a part of an outgoing message. The recipient will
first either [Select All] incoming message text, or select
only that part of the incoming message that appears to be
encrypted. This will be followed by [Copy] (to the
clipboard, still in the incoming message window of the
e-mail program), finally followed by [Decrypt Clipboard to
Text] in Notex to obtain decrypted text in the Notex editor.
If required, this text can be printed directly from the
program ([File] - [Page Setup] and/or [Print]) or it can
be saved as a file ([File] - [Save As]) to be processed
using other computer applications.

Ciphertext can also be printed in order to be stored or
transported on paper - provided it is either short enough
to be re-typed (without a single error!) or that it can be
scanned and converted ("OCR-ed") from a scanned image back
into a text file format.

Both edit text and the key can be entered using the mouse
and an on-screen "keyboard". This is advisable if Notex is
used on a computer (for instance, in an Internet Cafe) which
is suspected of being equipped with either hardware or
software key-loggers. Note that the on-screen keyboard must
be activated before the key entry dialog is opened. Entry
of text from both "real" and on-screen keyboard can be
freely intermixed. Note however that while the key-loggers
may be the most common method of compromising a Windows
system, they are many others.

About encrypted text:
---------------------

Text to be encrypted is first compressed, then encrypted
and finally turned from binary encrypted data once again
into text, this time as a series of 64-character lines,
composed entirely of "printable" ASCII characters, with no
spaces or punctuation. Such content can be easily sent and
received as the "body" of an e-mail message, without the
need to deal with e-mail "attachments".

Since the decryption process ignores lines which do not
appear to be part of encrypted text (as described above),
the program is somewhat tolerant of extraneous text (for
instance, e-mail message headers that may be picked up with
the [Select All] function of the e-mail program). This also
makes it easy to include or extract only a number of
encrypted lines to or from a message otherwise consisting
mostly of plaintext.

The encrypted text (intentionally) does not include any
element that could be used to directly ascertain the
"correctness" of a key used to decrypt it. If a key
different than the one used to encrypt the text is used for
decryption, arbitrary, "random-like" data will be produced.
An attempt to "decompress" such random data can either fail
with an error message, or it can produce "garbage" output
which is assumed to be easily recognizable as such by the
message recipient.

Note that the Notepad and clipboard on most Windows
systems are restricted to about 40K characters (about
12 type-written pages) - this is also the approximate
upper limit on the text in Notex.

Additional technical details:
-----------------------------

Encryption and decryption techniques used by this program
are based on the assumption that the plaintext consists
mostly (but not entirely) of ASCII text, and that its size
is that of a large e-mail message.

The text is first compressed.  This has two benefits: it
makes "brute force" cryptoanalysis more difficult, and it
ensures that the ciphertext encoded in ASCII text form
(see below) will - in all practical cases - be well below
the volume of the plaintext.

Compressed text is next encrypted using a strong
cryptographic algorithm ("Blowfish") in "Cipher Block
Chaining" (CBC) mode. A random Initialization Vector
ensures that identical text encoded using the same key
will not produce identical ciphertext.

Encrypted text resembles a random byte stream consisting
of both "printable characters" and various "control codes".
In order to make it possible to pass the ciphertext around
as "text" via clipboard or e-mail, it must be turned back
into ASCII text - that is, into a stream of bytes consisting
only of printable characters. This is achieved by what is
known as "base64" encoding: three bytes of binary data with
values anywhere between 0 and 255 are represented using 4
characters of text (where each character can have a more
restricted set of values: only those representing one of
selected set of 64 "printable" characters. Text in this
form is further organized - by purposefully adding
"new-line" control bytes at appropriate intervals - in
a number of fixed length text lines. If necessary,
the last line is padded up to this length with random
characters.

Resulting text can be decrypted on computers which use
different operating systems (Linux, Unix, etc.) as well as
on the computers with different byte ordering. Two programs:
encodex.c and decodex.c can be used either for this purpose
directly, or as a source of tested C language programming
code that can be incorporated in simple text editors on
other "platforms".

Decryption reverses the order and the direction of the three
steps described above.

Notex.exe can be renamed and will execute correctly under
any new name. It will execute directly from a floppy, CD or
any other removable medium, requires no "installation" and
writes nothing in the system directories or to the
configuration files on the computer it executes on. If your
browser will allow Windows programs to be run from their
network location (i.e., without "downloading") you can
encrypt and decrypt e-mails  with no encryption software of
any kind "installed" on your computer!

Version information:
--------------------

The current Notex version is 1.00. This program is published
with no restrictions on its use and copying, and no guarantee,
either explicit or implied.

End.
